hello my name is Dave memory and it's my
pleasure to present Christopher Simpson
the author of among other titles the
science of coercion subtitled
communication research and psychological
warfare 1945 to 1980 published in
softcover and hardcover by the oxford
university press copyright 1994 Chris
welcome back to our airwaves thanks Dave
now in undertaking us an examination of
mass communication research and
psychological warfare a good starting
place Chris would be to briefly define
what we mean by each psychological
warfare is as the army put it warfare
designed to debilitate the enemy in one
way or another it's it's includes
violence propaganda covert operations
assassination and so forth it's it's
called psychological only in that it
produces a psychological effect it's
it's not limited to just talking or to
broadcasts over the radio communication
research is a field it's part of
sociology they grew up in the 1950s and
what it does among other things is train
people in doing public opinion polling
in doing public relations work in
journalism in various quantitative and
qualitative ways of looking at what mass
communication is you trace the
relationship between mass communication
research and psychological warfare to a
number of overlapping developments one
of the chief developments and something
we touched on in our last interview was
a boy network which grew out of a series
of professional and personal
associations that developed during World
War two between many of the guiding
lights in what came to be mass
communication research and people who
were actively employed by the US
government in psychological warfare yes
that's right that's right and part of
what the book
contends is that communication research
as it presently exists could not have
come about without the money the
contacts the old boy network that you
mentioned and so forth that was rooted
in national security missions of one
sort or another and we can we can talk
about specific missions in a moment the
important thing or I think the most
fundamental thing about all this is the
way the extent to which we as a people
as a society have limited our view of
what communication is and now this is a
you know like one of those words it's
kind of like freedom you know it kind of
expands out its meaning sort of expands
out indefinitely but the point that I'm
trying to make here is that not all
societies not all cultures around the
world look at communication the way that
the United States does we have a very
strong tendency to the point that it
almost seems as though it's natural or
common sense the communication consists
of me telling you to do something or the
radio or the television or the you know
the the boss at work whatever giving
directions and that's what communication
means on page 62 you write as will
become apparent the dominant paradigm of
the period proved to be in substantial
part a paradigm of dominance in which
the appropriateness and inevitability of
elite control of communication was taken
as a given I think to a certain extent
that could be said to be a positive or
to the statement you just made yeah
right right and that's written in kind
of professor talk and then but basically
the idea is is that we assume that well
I'll give you an example I mean there
were studies done in the early nineteen
fifties that are that are still referred
to today whose on who work that were
called communication studies um
[Music]
who's that looked at Central Asian
republics of the USSR Kazakhstan and so
forth now if I can take a very brief
sidetrack these countries are much in
the news these days it's because they
have enormous oil reserves and this
there's a worldwide race the gold rush
as to who is going to going to take
control of this oil reserve by the way
Chris many of the audience is listening
to this have just heard a program that I
did about some of that geopolitical
petroleum related maneuvering so you're
right on target okay all right well in
any case getting back to the
communication side of all this the the
whole foundation upon which the study
was done and the policy that flowed from
it and so forth
the premise was that the US government
and its various security agencies would
communicate in the sense of telling the
Kazakhs and other people's what we
expected of them the conception the idea
that there would be that there would be
information coming back from Kazakhstan
they they accepted that but it's only
function was excuse me the only reason
the government was interested in it was
so that it could improve the method by
which it told the Kazakhs what to do so
so feedback in this this so there's no
communication here in in a in the
fundamental sense of the word there's no
there is not a inequality or a
fundamental exchange of ideas to the
extent that it's two-way at all it's a
feedback is used to improve or to
strengthen or rationalize the the means
of giving directions and then to take a
step further from that if you start
thinking about what communication means
in a in a religious sense or in the
sense of Eastern philosophies or in the
sense of
almost any worldview other than then you
know consumer style capitalism well it
means quite different things to other
societies and in study of that sort of
thing was was shut down and and really
made politically quite dangerous for for
several decades we're going to talk
about some of the institutions and some
of the history involved in developing
this type of relationship Chris uh you
talk about three key national security
directives which in many ways helped to
solidify the relationship between
government psychological warfare and
quote private unquote note the quote
communications research national
security directives for for a and ten
two which helped to lay the foundation
for the relationship we're talking about
sure sure well I think many of the
listeners will be familiar with NSC 10 -
it's a it's a foundation for a national
security state in many respects it's C
it's the basic framework for clandestine
operations and you know the the the the
trail of coup d'etats and assassinations
that have flowed since the the 1940s
for a for and for a are kind of
interesting more for what they reveal
about how the national security elite
think and how that process works and
it's much more bureaucratic than most
people realize I mean there's a tendency
to think that that Oh Allan Dulles or
whomever sits down in a room with with
his cronies and and does you know makes
this decision or that decision but in
reality most of these things are done in
a very bureaucratic way and and you have
proposals that bubble their way up
through the State Department in the
Defense Department and the Department of
Commerce for heaven's sakes and and so
on and then these various interagency
committees meet and hammer out the
language and of course the language
as most committees produce as most your
listeners know the language becomes more
and more vague and more and more a
amenable to to whatever to a variety of
interpretations okay so what sent me in
in the case of four and four a what they
did is that they pass NSC four and that
said okay well we're going to the
Americans are under assault by Russian
propaganda and communist expansionism
and therefore we need or they need the
country needs a a propaganda program to
meet this challenge
and so that meant like The Voice of
America the agency that eventually
emerged as the u.s. Information Agency
and so on now this was secret this was
actually classified as confidential the
thing is with confidential ratings is
that for legal reasons literally
hundreds of thousands of government
employees have access to confidential
quote-unquote papers so that if the NSC
has a confidential policy it's generally
on the front page of the newspapers
within a week and I'm talking about in
the 1940s not in the 1990s in that in
the 1990s it's on the front page of the
newspapers before the day is out so the
officially secret ie officially
confidential policy was we were going to
have a propaganda program that was going
to be anti-communist
now minutes after passing four NSC four
they then turned to an entirely separate
decision that was called NSC for a and
this was classified top secret and what
that meant was that even acknowledging
the existence of this decision was
considered a violation of the law um so
this too
Asian officially did not even exist and
what it consisted of was presidential
authorization for clandestine operations
sabotage counter insurgency insurgency
assassinations and so forth you know the
list to carry out the this same form of
psychological warfare
so the interesting thing here is is that
is that you have sort of shelves within
shelves and that the different people
who are players in this game can
manipulate their language depending upon
who they're talking to if if they're
talking to the general public they can
say well psychological warfare means
broadcasting over the Voice of America
and I think most people would not get
too worked up over that frankly yeah you
know for better or worse but if they're
talking to a different audience
psychological warfare has a quite
different meaning and and it can mean
overthrowing the government of Guatemala
so so you have the creation of whole
systems of euphemism and double-talk and
doublethink even in a George Orwell type
sense that on which the clandestine
world
thrived at that time and continues to
thrive today on page 52 Chris you have a
stunning statement which illustrates the
extent of overlap and perhaps that's
even the wrong term between national
security and mass communication research
as an academic discipline you write the
earliest community accumulative data
concerning government funding of social
sciences provided by the National
Science Foundation in 1952 that report
shows that over ninety six percent of
all reported federal funding of social
science at that time was drawn from the
US military that I think could be said
to be a major outgrowth of those various
national security documents and oh
that's really and and and
think of it you know Italy let's leave
aside for a moment the tendency to
demonize the military because frankly I
think that that's a that's a real over
simplification of of how the real world
were I agree um but from from a strictly
dollars and cents point of view when the
Pentagon went to the Congress and say
okay well we want a hundred million
dollars to do X the Congress is going to
to say well how exactly is what you're
going to do advance the the so-called
security interest of the United States
now over the the forty years more than
forty years now that have transpired
since 1950 what we've seen is a form of
Keynesian economics in which which
military contracts are literally
structured so that a little scoops of
money go into the key congressional
districts and and the the contracts
become a means of actually a funding you
know their pork barrel projects for for
congressman and this is what explains
for example last year you have the
Congress passing spending literally
billions of dollars on advanced bombers
that even the Pentagon even the Joint
Chiefs of Staff say we don't want we
don't need them we can't use them but
the Congress comes along and says no
we've got a we got to buy him we got to
build them why it's because it means
jobs in their district so you know to
bring this back around to the 1950s the
end communication research what it meant
at that point was that in order to get
funding the the projects had to be
framed in such a way that it contributed
to
preparations for nuclear war for example
to to the execution or the carrying out
of the Korean War to the to the various
espionage and insurgency tasks involved
in overthrowing the government of
Guatemala in Iran and Egypt and you know
the the list that you've heard and so on
so that that to get funding for
communication research one had to be
able to explain the research in such a
way that it made some sort of
contribution to those activities Chris
speaking of the 1950s Cold War climate
the manufacturing of bombers and
communication research something that
touches on all of those shores this
project revere tell us about that the
project revealeth was a you know if it
wasn't so tragic it would be humorous um
but what it was the University of
Washington got a great big grant of
money mainly from the Air Force the
largest single grant of money for
communication research of that decade in
which uh their project was to fly over
towns in Montana and Idaho and
Washington state and also done in Utah
and Alabama and so on and drop leaflets
on these towns and the leaflets said
this could have been a Soviet bomb and
you know bombers can attack your
neighborhood and you have to be on alert
and call such-and-such a telephone
number to to report that you've found
this leaflet and to volunteer for you
know these visa skywatching type a civil
defense maneuvers now a couple things
about this number one is that this came
right at the height of the so-called
bomber gap which was a manufactured
thing that that claimed that the
Russians were far ahead of the United
States and
bombers and that therefore the Americans
had to invest a lot of money in building
new and more sophisticated bombers and
so on what what even very conservative
historians agree today is that the
bomber cap was made up and that it
reflected a fight between the Air Force
and the army over control of nuclear
weapons policy but here you have right
in the middle of this argument
essentially a domestic argument in the
United States you have the Air Force
dropping leaflets on towns in Montana
saying the Russians are coming the
Russians are coming and this this was a
annex this was an experiment in
propaganda in other words how well did
these leaflets work to get a message out
and it was a propaganda project in its
own right in other words that it was
publicity for a particular political
point of view that the Air Force wished
to promote now you described project
revere as being a diffusion study does
that refer to the dissemination the
spreading of that message yeah that's
right and and diffusion as a whole
subfield of communication research today
and you know there's this various people
who wrote their dissertations based on
project reviewer who are to this day to
this day the principal authors and kind
of a grand old man of diffusion research
in the United States um and they use
that authority in terms of of who sits
on the editorial boards of what academic
journals who gets tenure who doesn't get
tenure who gets appointed to this chair
and not to that chair and and so forth
and so on so that that these these types
of projects this type of government
backing plays itself out in the little
world of the university and most people
probably wouldn't care about that but uh
that in turn plays itself out in
how do we train journalists how do we
train public relations people what are
the attitudes that universities in the
education system in general attempt to
instill in these people who then go out
and are really the voices of our society
to a certain extent is like those old
boy networks made manifest and evolved
through the years yes and and evolved in
and in a sense grew in some organic way
if you follow me I'd like to say
something else about these diffusion
studies and that is I'd like to see two
other things
number one is the dropping leaflets from
airplanes has no civilian communication
value whatever zero zilch when was the
last time anybody in the listening
audience God advertising messages in the
form of leaflets dropped from airplanes
it just doesn't happen it is not
functional as a civilian form of
communication what it is useful for
however is two things number one and
this is exactly why the Air Force was
funding it was that in the midst of an
atomic war they were going to send
bombers into those areas that had been
hit by either American bombs over in
Russia or by Russian bombs in the United
States or in Europe you know you name
the place and then drop these leaflets
as a means of communicating with
societies that were in in smoking ruins
that's one use for them the other use
for them particularly during the
mid-1950s was they would load them up on
balloons high-altitude balloons in the
balloons would be set off and they would
float on the air currents over into
particularly in the Eastern Europe and
in some cases into China where they
would then drop these leaflets and the
leaflets would say you know overthrow
Stalin or or you know freedom is coming
and you know these types of political
messages
now the and that that those balloon
programs played themselves out in two
ways one of them tragic and the other
one ridiculous
the tragic one was that there was at
least one case of a civilian Czech
airliner whose controls for the air
aircraft became entangled in in the in
one of these flights of balloons in the
aircraft crashed killing several dozen
people there was there was no the United
States government refused to take any
responsibility whatever for this crash
despite the fact that it was it was a
clandestine American programs that had
created the conditions that brought
about this crash the other way that it
played itself out is in many of the
so-called UFO sightings and much of the
in what is in my view and I know this is
not everybody will agree with me but
frankly I think the preposterous claims
that are made about UFOs which you you
have secret government programs that are
whose existence is officially denied
that consist of sending up balloons
filled with leaflets that occasionally
catch the light of one sort or another
and people on the ground say oh my god
it's a UFO and so then this you know
translates out into the popular culture
into the form of x-files and and so on
now personally you know the question
comes as well watch to anybody care I
mean the x-files is an entertaining
program it's it's a you know there's
nothing wrong with it is there and in
the sense there isn't but what troubles
me about it is
that we get ourselves into this sort of
into a cultural mode where we where we
explain the problems that we have based
on myths and the myths are people from
outer space
the myth in Nazi Germany were that the
Jews were responsible the myths in
America are that we're not consuming
enough or that there are these you know
kind of fantastic elaborate
intergalactic events that somehow are
conspiring against us and so forth and
so on so you know so so take that for
what it's worth I I don't buy a lot of
the UFO stuff and the reason is is that
I know exactly where it came from it
came from these secret programs to to
fly balloons for propaganda purposes
there's a researcher named Jacques
Vallee who's done some remarkable work
on the deliberate alien deception and
also on some of the fascistic
connections and overtones to some of the
UFO calls his name is Jacques Vallee and
his some of his works such as the
messengers of deception and revelations
have been accessed on this program there
are some remarkable aircraft of of
unconventional configuration largely
deriving from stealth technology and the
reconnaissance aircraft which to a
layperson would look like a UFO but
vallei has done some research which
complements what you just said and it
demonstrates he's demonstrated very
conclusively that both extremes with
regard to the UFO question one that
there's nothing at all whereas people
have seen some of these extraordinary
aircraft which have various applications
that are kept secret and on the other
hand the the aliens are among us and
giving us their technology and we should
let them rule us has been deliberately
disseminated by some of the most shady
of our national security interests
because we're running low on time on
this side on the other side I'd like to
discuss some of the institutions which
exemplify and perpetuated the marriage
of psychological warfare
and mass communication research in the
United States Institute's such as the
Bureau of applied Social Research and
publications such as public opinion
quarterly
that however in our next half hour
segment we've been visiting with Chris
Simpson the author of among other titles
the science of coercion communication
research and psychological warfare 1945
to 1980 hard and soft cover editions
published by Oxford University Press
copyright 1994 Chris will join you in
our next half hour I look forward to it
hello my name is Dave Emery and in this
half-hour we're going to continue with
the discussion with Chris Simpson the
author of the science of coercion
communication research in psychological
warfare 1945 to 1980 hardened softcover
editions by the oxford university press
copyright 1994 chris welcome back to our
airwaves thank you we're talking about
the overlap and the interrelationship
between communication research and
psychological warfare and that
relationship is in many ways concretize
din the form of a number of in fact you
identify six different centers of
communication research that grew up in
the 1950s the bureau of applied Social
Research the Institute for Social
Research at the University of Michigan
the National Opinion Research Center the
Bureau of social science research the
RAND Corporation and one that I'd like
to leave for a few minutes into this
discussion the Center for International
Studies you talk about those
institutions and their dual roles as
both national security entities and
academic entities and in turn realize
this is a tall order but their
relationship with public opinion
quarterly which in many ways serve as a
mouthpiece for the dissemination of the
work that they generated well I think
you've summarized it pretty well and and
it would be redundant for me to to to go
back over it now now the book
concentrates on the period between 1945
and 1960
[Music]
I think is worth examining is the extent
to which the Academy in places like
Bureau of applied Social Research are
very liberal institutions
the politically liberal I have no doubt
that most of the the people voted for
the Democrats and some of them consider
themselves wet Democrats or even one
form or another of Marxist of you know
one description or another anyway the
point being is is that scientists and
intellectuals for the most part they're
certainly to a greater degree than the
society as a whole our left-of-center I
don't think that's any particular secret
and maybe in economics the story is
different but certainly in a social
sciences that's the case well so if that
is so what explains then first of all
this work on national security programs
in second of all and more fundamentally
this sort of cultural this participation
in a cultural transformation that built
a national security state that the most
of us take for granted as being just the
way the world is and I think that part
of the answer to that is that that what
happened was that the scientists tended
to internalize the values of the
national security state as a means of
marketing themselves to the national
security state now these are not dumb
people they're not naive at the same
time they rather often tended let me
back up for just a minute and explain
something that was going on in the early
1950s if I could interject ever so
briefly Chris I think that the National
Science Foundation study in 1952 showing
that 96% of all social science funding
came from the military at that time
would certainly both explain and
perpetuate what you just talked about
getting right right well in the early
1950s you had an attack from the
McCarthyite right wing on
the Social Sciences and and on even on
the voice of America those of you those
of your listeners who are familiar with
McCarthy know that The Voice of America
was held up as being a hotbed of of
subversion right so the and and this
attack extended to the big Foundation
such as the Ford Foundation and the
Carnegie Foundation Rockefeller Brothers
fund was helped Rockefeller Brothers was
held up as being a secret front for
socialism and one-world government and
so on now you know I'll grant you that
the Rockefellers have played a complex
political role in the United States and
around the world but but to see Nelson
Rockefeller as a Sikh as a closeted
socialist I think is a little bit silly
but anyway and the the so there was this
attack from the extreme right and the
way that these academics and their
foundations like the Ford Foundation and
so on and the big universities the big
Ivy League schools the way they defended
themselves in Caen hearings before
Congress was to say well what we're
doing with sociology is the most potent
tool for fighting back the communist
menace that that we as intellectuals are
forging a whole new science in in how to
fight the bad guys and how to advance
American interests and American
interests in in kind of the 1984 think
of the time I mean the double think of
the time automatically meant all those
good things about America that we would
like to believe and you know about
democracy liberty equality of
opportunity
you know all that good stuff so the way
that the liberal academics protected
themselves against the radical right was
to sort of circle the wagons too so to
speak Timothy to use a metaphor and
close down in on a on a on a center of
the profession on a small group of
narrow ideas that were acceptable to the
to the national security state and those
became the central ideas that were
permissible to be taught in American
universities about this particular
subject that were permissible to be
written about in academic journals about
this particular subject and and in turn
those that that particular form of
ideological conformity of a of a liberal
aroma if you will
became really the only articulation of
what communication or what communication
research is or should be that was
permitted in this country both the left
and the right were to a very large
degree crossed and if you want to talk
about the left way you had the FBI I
mean in New York City there was a a
school for Social Research that was
basically run by the left and it drew
something like five thousand students a
year the FBI said ah well this is a
communist plot and the and indeed there
were in fact a communist party people
involved in that school you know a
communist party people read books like
anybody else um and so the FBI subpoena
their student lists and deny you know
canceled their tax exemption and
basically harassed the
institution out of existence so that if
you had the wrong ideas about what
permissible sociology was you you faced
genuine persecution the I was reading
some Declassified records is that the
American the early sociological academic
sociological society had the unfortunate
acronym of American Sociological Society
if you think that through you'll see
what I'm saying
um and I got a bunch of army
intelligence records where army
intelligence for heaven's sakes
with sending secret agents into the
meeting of the American Sociological
Society in an effort to smoke out
radicals and they would you know and
they would sit in the sessions and
furiously take notes to figure out
whether or not professor so-and-so had
said something that was out of line
there are a lot of people who confuse
sociology with socialism yeah yeah yeah
but they're entirely different concepts
or scholar tourism is a so-called
behavioral science that looks at how
groups of human beings behave right now
I would argue that a lot of sociology
has preconceptions built into it so that
tend to reinforce the power relations
that already exists socialism well
that's a whole nother game yes I mean
that's one of those words shirt that one
can talk about its definition for the
next you know six or eight hours and not
be any clearer about it than you became
I would simply noted that many people do
make that that error they confuse two
totally different things some of the
names that loom large in your discussion
of the interrelationship between mass
communication and psychological warfare
from 1945 to 1960 all Wilbur Schramm and
a major text that he wrote which admit
was helped to shape matter mitigation
research Wilbur Schramm was he ended up
as dean of the
school communication of Stanford he was
very much the author of he wrote a book
about propaganda in the mid 1950s in
which he put forward the idea that there
there are these several different forms
of communication and two of them that
are relevant here are authoritarian and
totalitarian and if you remember the
Reagan years you remember that that the
argument made by people like Jean
Kirkpatrick and so on uh were that that
PE mass murderers literally mass
murderers like Pinochet in Chile for
example or Marcos in the Philippines or
you know you know the list that they
were authoritarians which was bad but
not all that bad whereas Brezhnev era
USSR or or Czechoslovakia is you know in
1967 these were supposedly two Tollett
Arian societies that were somehow
qualitatively more brutal and vicious
than Pinochet's Chile and that this
therefore justified the extreme measures
of building you know 20,000 nuclear
weapons in an arms race against these
people that book by the way the process
and effects of mass communication yeah
yes Ram exactly right exactly right so
anyway this distinction between
authoritarian and totalitarian at least
in my opinion is largely contrived and
is largely a political distinction and
it has little scientific merit it's
because what it does is it link it just
lumps very different types of societies
together and pretends that they're all
one at the risk of seeming a trifle
corny it actually seems to me like an
actual realization of Orwell's Newspeak
well in in a certain extent I think that
you're right I mean you had
uh err everything from from you know Kim
il-sung's style North Korea to to the
Italian Communist Party uh presented as
a single monolithic bloc and and then on
the other hand you you had genuinely
jennife idle government such as that
which emerged in Guatemala for example
to name only one example that were
somehow America's friends so so these
ideas they they get off campus and they
become the code speak that politicians
use that journalists use that professors
use that the that the the people on the
chat shows on Sunday morning news and so
on to justify whatever policy happens to
be in vogue at at at a given time on
page 85 you write this continuity of
leading theoreticians became part of a
broader pattern through which the
psychological warfare of one generation
became the International communication
to the next if I'm understanding you
correctly I think that sort of
exemplifies and sums up what you were
just talking about yeah yeah what
happened I'll give you a good example in
some ways it's kind of amusing is that
there was a particular researcher named
Chitra Smith who did a annotated
bibliography called um in the early
1950s called propaganda and
psychological warfare in which she
systematically collected everything that
had been published on this and made
little descriptions of it and where it
could be found and so forth and so on
alright that was originally done under a
secret contract by the mid-1950s the
rhetoric was starting to change and the
whole way that the did the news speak
was put was starting to change for
reasons that are explained in the book
and Chitra Smith's
um bibliography which had begun as a
propaganda and psychological warfare was
print
by I believe it was Columbia University
Press but you'll have to check me on
that but was was published by a leading
Academic Press
under the title of international
communication the identical text the
identical discussion of what
communication was and where where the
articles were to be found and what it
consisted of and how it worked and who
was right and who was wrong and all of
the rest went from being a classified
text on propaganda and psychological
warfare to being a public text called
international communication and and this
is one example of how the double speak
about communication and indeed about
sociology about how we how we look at
society how that grows and how it sort
of mutates a decade after decade I think
today that we're in you know we're in a
in a new stage I mean we're not in the
1950s anymore
but the same mutation process continues
Chris we're running low on time that I'd
like to hit a few more points briefly
illustrating that evolution from
yesterday's psychological warfare to
today's or tomorrow's communication
theory
Daniel learner in his book the passing
of traditional society right right
originally done for the voice of America
and becomes the foundation of what is
called euphemistically in my opinion the
development school of communication
research development is the the early
version of the the International
Monetary Fund business that's going on
right now in terms of the the the
economic penetration of Asian societies
and Mexico and so on
[Music]
what the what learner argued in a
nutshell is that people were starting to
learn about the world but they didn't in
society such as Egypt for example to
name only one example but they didn't
have any political power which was true
enough and that made them angry so a
learner's solution was to come along
with a variety of propaganda techniques
to try to sort of ease them into feeling
comfortable with their powerlessness
powerlessness and when that didn't work
the next step which was developed
largely at MIT at the Center for
International Studies which was one of
those six organizations which overlap
academia and national security that we
exactly get exactly so the next step was
to was to add policemen and guns and and
different types of first of all
selective violence you know I mean
targeting trade union leaders for
example for either co-optation on the
one hand or to be murdered on the other
hand and then when the Selective
violence didn't always do the job you
had the emergence of what is today
called low intensity warfare and low
intensity warfare really is a full-scale
warfare carried out at the grassroots
you have armies fighting against the
civilians of the of their own countries
so this interweaving of the of the
rationale or the claims about how
communication work very rapidly spill
over into into military doctrine it's
because military doctrine if you have a
society that cannot hold itself together
because it is so unjust then the first
thing they try is propaganda to convince
people to put up with it despite its
injustice and then when the propaganda
fails the next thing that happens are
death squads and and various forms of of
war against civilians in that particular
evolution we've seen it started in in
Greece and in the 1940s and up through
the 1950s and it continues to be used
today uh you mentioned that that
development theory actually holds that
unchecked or unregulated development in
the third world will actually be
deleterious to u.s. national security
and on page 90 you write
thus the cena's approach that's a Center
for International Studies came to be
called development theory unquote by
communication specialists among military
planners it took the name limited
warfare on I quote or perhaps low
intensity warfare a term that became
very well known on the US National
Security stage in the 1980s sure limited
warfare is a linguistic predecessor to
to low intensity warfare I mean limited
warfare served its purpose in in getting
in in providing a rationale for the
American invasion of Vietnam and and
then sort of burned itself out on that
and so they came up with a new term the
new term is low intensity warfare among
the types of development that was seen
as possibly injurious to the US you
mentioned was the desegregation of
schools in Little Rock right well that
was Little Rock was studied in in the
same terms he the the unifying theme
here is not that the US government is
against any sort of development because
that's not the case sure
the what it is is that the US government
only wants development that is
cooperative to and subordinate to the US
demands on a given country which
typically come in the form of either
labor or natural resources sometimes it
comes in the forms of places to put
naval bases or Air Force bases so
development is fought is is well and
good as long as it's done on the
Americans terms that's why for example
the the implication of that let me say
it this way the implication of that
theory is what happened in Nicaragua
during the Reagan administration here
you have a tiny country that's about the
size of Virginian that has a smaller
population than the state of Virginia
which heaven forbid was providing a good
example to the rest of Central America
it it improved its education it it
lowered the infant mortality rate better
health better food and contrary to what
the Reagan administration said was
actually rather free intellectually in
terms of what was broadcast on the radio
and certainly freer than Guatemala was
or El Salvador in terms of what was
broadcast on the radio or published in
the newspapers and so forth but it was a
bad example from Washington's point of
view and that's why they were willing to
spend tens of millions of hours in many
people's lives and and you know cook up
these Oliver North schemes you know in
order to to destroy Nicaragua
economically they tried to do the same
thing with Cuba I'm not a big fan of
Cuba you know I'm not trying to
apologize for bad things that happen in
other countries but what I'm trying to
say is is that if the Americans see
development even successful development
that that
they don't that is not under their thumb
then they'll try to destroy it and and
that this has been such a consistent
pattern for almost 50 years now that I
think that as Americans as voters as
taxpayers we have to take a look at this
and understand exactly how destructive
this is to people around the world Chris
I'd like to take just a minute to talk
about public opinion quarterly and it's
manifestation of the overlap between
covert action and academic theory and
that by way of a jump point to your
newest title which also covers the
relationship between national security
affairs and academia public opinion
quarterly and it's national security
connected editor DeWitt Poole
yeah the ripple was so was a propaganda
specialist at the State Department and
was one of a of a really very small
coterie of people I mean we're talking
about a couple dozen people who said who
articulated American policy towards the
Soviet Union going back to like 1917 I
mean we're talking about several
generations back now um DeWitt Poole
went on sabbatical from the State
Department where he was basically a
professional anti-bolshevik uh policy
strong-arm guy and you see the same
types today in Washington or I do and he
went to Princeton where he set up public
opinion quarterly and and its function
was to encourage the study and the
exploitation of that study of public
opinion in the interests of powerful
people in the United States both
corporate and government interests
that's who do it pool was yeah you know
backgrounds in OSS in CIA - sure sure
and a deal old radio liberation from
Bolshevism and so on some of these
immigrate operations that employed
ex-nazis you
read the headlines you know recently
about about marches of a former SS man
in Lithuania and the bombing of a
synagogue in Latvia or and so on you see
that these people are still with us
anyway to plug the new title it's called
universities in the Empire it's a
collection of essays and the essays are
I introduced it but the essays are not
by me they're by other people and
they're quite good and the there's a one
essay about Project Camelot for example
there's a second one that looks at the
history of International Studies there
is an essay that looks at Russian
Russians the in the Soviet Union studies
of the history of science and then how
those changed as perestroika and
glasnost came along and how it would
take a little bit of time to explain the
whole argument but the gist of it was is
that that there's considerably more
similarity in the intellectual life in
the Soviet Union and the United States
then either side has been willing to
admit it now that's not to say they had
the same ideas sure I'm talking about
the dynamics of how power is spread out
in those societies particularly in
intellectual circles uh would you say it
would be accurate to characterize that
time to a certain extent is discussing
how uh what you talk about is the
dominant paradigm in communication
research to a certain tent has been set
by this relationship between academia
and national security I I think so yeah
I think that that's a good way to sum it
up sure already that title again Chris
it's called universities and Empire it's
just out it's by the new press and and
it should be available oh you know via
the World Wide Web there's a variety of
and of course local bookstores there's a
variety of ways to obtain it
universities and Empire edited by Chris
Simpson the new press copyright 1990 98
correct right exactly
alrighty a new title once again
illustrating the relationship between
academia and national security not only
in the US but elsewhere as well we've
been visiting with Chris Simpson the
author of among other titles the science
of coercion mass communication research
and psychological warfare 1945 to 1960
that is published in hardcover and
softcover by the Oxford University Press
and copyright 1994 for Chris Simpson
this is dave emery saying thanks for
listening